[ADR: 015] IBC Packet Receiver (#5230)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-015-ibc-packet-receiver.md

# ADR 015: IBC Packet Receiver

## Changelog

- 2019 Oct 22: Initial Draft

## Context

> [ICS 26](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module) defines function `handlePacketRecv`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ICS 26](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module) defines function [`handlePacketRecv`](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module#packet-relay). 
```

> `handlePacketRecv` executes per-module `onRecvPacket`, verifies the packet merkle proof, and pushes the acknowledgement bytes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`handlePacketRecv` executes per-module `onRecvPacket`, verifies the packet merkle proof, and pushes the acknowledgement bytes, if present,
```

> to the state. 

Reviewer: which state? Which store key does would it use? would this require another Keeper?

Author: The acknowledgements are pushed into the IBC keeper state

Reviewer: which of all the IBC keepers? the channel keeper (ICS04) or the transfer keeper (ICS20)

Author: The channel keeper(under `ports/portID/channels/chanID/acknowledgement/sequence`)

> The mechanism is simillar with the transaction handling logic in `baseapp`. After authentication, the handler is executed, and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The mechanism is similar to the transaction handling logic in `baseapp`. After authentication, the handler is executed, and 
```

the authentication state change must be committed regardless of the result of the handler execution. 

ICS 26 also requires acknowledgement writing which has to be done after the handler execution and also must be commited 
regardless of the result of the handler execution.  

## Decision

> We will define an `AnteHandler` for IBC packet receiving. The `AnteHandler` will iterate over the messages included in the 

Reviewer 2: IMO, we should avoid "we" - "the Cosmos SDK will define"?

Author: The template suggested the form `We will-` under the paragraph `decision`, I have no specific opinion, can change

> transaction, type asserts to check whether the message is type of IBC packet receiving, and verifies merkle proof. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
transaction, type switch to check whether the message contains an incoming IBC packet, and if so verify the Merkle proof.
```

```go
// Pseudocode

> func AnteHandler(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, bool) (sdk.Context, sdk.Result, bool) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
func IBCAnteHandler(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, bool) (sdk.Context, sdk.Result, bool) {
```

  for _, msg := range tx.GetMsgs() {
    if msg, ok := msg.(MsgPacket); ok {
      if err := VerifyPacket(msg.Packet, msg.Proofs, msg.ProofHeight); err != nil {
         return ctx, err.Result(), true
      }
    }
  }
  return ctx, sdk.Result{}, false
}
```

> The `AnteHandler` will be inserted to the top level application, next to the signature authentication logic provided by `auth.NewAnteHandler`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This supplemental `IBCAnteHandler` will be inserted to the top level application, next to the signature authentication logic provided by `auth.NewAnteHandler`.
```

> The `AnteHandler` will be inserted to the top level application, next to the signature authentication logic provided by `auth.NewAnteHandler`.

Reviewer: where is must the `IBCAnteHandler` be located in the Chain of AnteDecorators?

Reviewer: this also needs to be addressed

Author: It should be located after the default transaction authenticator(auth handler for our case) and not dependent on any other. Will add it to the doc.

> We will define a new type of handler, named `FoldHandler`. `FoldHandler` will be called after all of the messages are executed. 

Reviewer: can you define what a `FoldHandler` is and what it does? It's not clear as it's not defined on ICS26 either

```go
type FoldHandler func(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, result sdk.Result) (sdk.Result, bool)

// Pseudocode
func (app *BaseApp) runTx(tx sdk.Tx) sdk.Result {
  anteCtx, msCache := app.cacheTxContext(ctx, tx)
  newCtx, result, abort := app.AnteHandler(ctx, tx)
  if abort {
    return result
  }
  msCache.Write()
  
  runMsgCtx, msCache := app.cacheTxContext(ctx, tx)
  result = app.runMsgs(runMsgCtx, msgs)
  if result.IsOk() {
    msCache.Write()
  }
  
  // BEGIN modification made in this proposal
  

>   foldCtx, msCache := app.cacheTxContext(ctx, tx)

Reviewer 3: This looks like basically the same call as the two above. Is there any way to fold this into the regular antehandler? Especially with the work done to modularize it?

Reviewer: ++. This looks like code duplication from above. Also, I don't see were `foldCtx` is being used.

  result, abort = app.FoldHandler(ctx, tx, result)
  if abort {
     return result
  }
  msCache.Write()
  return result
  
  // END modification made in this proposal
}
```

The IBC module will expose `FoldHandler` as defined below:

```go
// Pseudocode
func FoldHandler(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, result sdk.Result) (sdk.Result, bool) {
  // TODO: consider multimsg
}
```

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

> This section describes the resulting context, after applying the decision. All consequences should be listed here, not just the "positive" ones. A particular decision may have positive, negative, and neutral consequences, but all of them affect the team and project in the future.

### Positive

> {positive consequences}

Reviewer: how does this ADR solve the problem? what are the pros of implementing this ADR over implementing ICS26 from scratch?

### Negative

> {negative consequences}

Reviewer: Does this ADR replace the ICS26 canonical implementation from the spec (or at least in the case of packet receiving)? That would be a negative consequence.

Author: This implementation behaves equally with the specification so I don't think it replaces the spec

regardless of the result of the handler execution.

## Decision

The Cosmos SDK will define an `AnteHandler` for IBC packet receiving. The `AnteHandler` will iterate over the messages included in the 
transaction, type switch to check whether the message contains an incoming IBC packet, and if so verify the Merkle proof.

```go
// Pseudocode
func IBCAnteHandler(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, bool) (sdk.Context, sdk.Result, bool) {
  for _, msg := range tx.GetMsgs() {
    if msg, ok := msg.(MsgPacket); ok {
      if err := VerifyPacket(msg.Packet, msg.Proofs, msg.ProofHeight); err != nil {
         return ctx, err.Result(), true
      }
    }
  }
  return ctx, sdk.Result{}, false
}
```

where `MsgPacket` is the `sdk.Msg` type including any IBC packet inside and embedding `Packet.Route()` method.

The `AnteHandler` will be inserted to the top level application, after the signature authentication logic provided by `auth.NewAnteHandler`, utilizing `AnteDecorator` pattern.

The Cosmos SDK will define the wrapper function `ReceivePacket` under the port keeper. The function will wrap packet handlers to automatically handle the acknowledgements.

```go
// Pseudocode

> func (k PortKeeper) ReceivePacket(ctx sdk.Context, msg MsgPacket, h func(sdk.Context, Packet), sdk.Result) sdk.Result {

Reviewer: we should declare a `type  PacketHandler func(sdk.Context, Packet) sdk.Result`
```suggestion
func (k PortKeeper) ReceivePacket(ctx sdk.Context, msg MsgPacket, packetHandler PacketHandler) error {
```

  // Cache context
  cctx, write := ctx.CacheContext()

  // verification already done inside the antehandler
  res := h(cctx, msg.Packet)
  
  // write the cache only if succedded

>   if res.IsOK() {

Reviewer 2: Odd usage of `sdk.Result` (see below), but I think the logic is fine.

    write()
  }
  
  // set the result to OK to persist the state change
  res.Code = sdk.CodeOK
  
  // res.Data will be stored as acknowledgement; []byte{} will be stored if not exists
  if res.Data == nil {
    res.Data = []byte{}
  }
  k.SetPacketAcknowledgement(ctx, msg.PortID, msg.ChannelID, msg.Sequence, res.Data)

  return res
}
```

Example application-side usage:

```go
func NewHandler(k Keeper) sdk.Handler {
  return func(ctx sdk.Context, msg sdk.Msg) sdk.Result {
    switch msg := msg.(type) {
    case ibc.MsgPacket:
      return k.port.ReceivePacket(ctx, msg, func(ctx sdk.Context, p Packet) sdk.Result {
        switch packet := packet.(type) {
        case MyPacket:
          return handleMyPacket(ctx, k, packet)
        }
      })
    }
  }
}

> func handleMyPacket(ctx sdk.Context, k keeper, packet MyPacket) sdk.Result {

Reviewer 2: Odd usage of `sdk.Result`. Why not just return an `(acknowledgement, error)` pair directly?

Author: Just to make it looks similar with the standard handling model, I actually prefer to define a new result type, `ibc.Acknowledgement` or `ibc.Result`, which essentially is the pair of `(ack, error)`

Reviewer 2: I agree, let's do that instead.

  if failureCondition {
    return AckInvalidPacketContent(k.codespace, []byte{packet.Data})
  }
  return sdk.Result{}
}
```

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

- Intuitive interface for developers - IBC handlers do not need to care about IBC authentication
- State change commitment logic is embedded into `baseapp.runTx` logic
- IBC applications do not need to define message type for receiving packet

### Negative

> - AnteHandler processes over all the transactions before each handler is executed. `UpdateClient` and `RecvPacket` cannot be processed in the same transaction

Reviewer 2: I missed this before but this is also quite unfortunate. Is there any way around this that preserves the ergonomics?

Author: I think there should be some challenge period between the header submission and the packet receiving for equivocation for the most case, and having two messages separately processed in the chain is better for preventing race condition.

Reviewer 2: Better for preventing what race condition? The proposer will always control the order.

I think there are definitely cases where we want this - consider a solo machine signing with a private key, there is no equivocation challenge period.

the handler execution.

## Decision

The Cosmos SDK will define an `AnteHandler` for IBC packet receiving. The
`AnteHandler` will iterate over the messages included in the transaction, type
`switch` to check whether the message contains an incoming IBC packet, and if so
verify the Merkle proof.

```go
// Pseudocode
type ProofVerificationDecorator struct {
  clientKeeper ClientKeeper
  channelKeeper ChannelKeeper
}

func (pvr ProofVerificationDecorator) AnteHandle(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, simulate bool, next sdk.AnteHandler) (sdk.Context, error) {
  for _, msg := range tx.GetMsgs() {
    var err error
    switch msg := msg.(type) {
    case client.MsgUpdateClient:
      err = pvr.clientKeeper.UpdateClient(msg.ClientID, msg.Header)
    case channel.MsgPacket:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyPacket(msg.Packet, msg.Proofs, msg.ProofHeight)
    case chanel.MsgAcknowledgement:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyAcknowledgement(msg.Acknowledgement, msg.Proof, msg.ProofHeight)
    case channel.MsgTimeoutPacket:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyTimeout(msg.Packet, msg.Proof, msg.ProofHeight, msg.NextSequenceRecv)
    default:
      continue
    }

    if err != nil {

>       return ctx, err.Result()

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      return ctx, err
```

}
```

Where `MsgUpdateClient`, `MsgPacket`, `MsgAcknowledgement`, `MsgTimeoutPacket`
are `sdk.Msg` types correspond to `handleUpdateClient`, `handleRecvPacket`,
`handleAcknowledgementPacket`, `handleTimeoutPacket` of the routing module,
respectively.

The `ProofVerificationDecorator` will be inserted to the top level application.
It should come right after the default sybil attack resistent layer from the
current `auth.NewAnteHandler`:

```go
// add IBC ProofVerificationDecorator to the Chain of
func NewAnteHandler(
  ak keeper.AccountKeeper, supplyKeeper types.SupplyKeeper, ibcKeeper ibc.Keeper,
  sigGasConsumer SignatureVerificationGasConsumer) sdk.AnteHandler {
  return sdk.ChainAnteDecorators(
    NewSetUpContextDecorator(), // outermost AnteDecorator. SetUpContext must be called first
    ...
    NewIncrementSequenceDecorator(ak),
    ibcante.ProofVerificationDecorator(ibcKeeper.ClientKeeper, ibcKeeper.ChannelKeeper), // innermost AnteDecorator
  )
}
```

The Cosmos SDK will define the wrapper function `WriteAcknowledgement` under the
ICS05 port keeper. The function will wrap packet handlers to automatically handle
the acknowledgments.

```go
// Pseudocode

> type Ack struct {

Reviewer: I don't think this is necessary. We can just use `sdk.Result` and, in case of an error, `sdk.ResultFromError()`

  Data []byte
  Err sdk.Error
}

func (ack Ack) IsOK() bool {
  return ack.Err.IsOK()
}

> type PacketHandler func(sdk.Context, Packet) Ack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type PacketHandler func(sdk.Context, Packet) sdk.Result
```

func (k PortKeeper) WriteAcknowledgement(ctx sdk.Context, msg MsgPacket, h PacketHandler) sdk.Result {
  // Cache context
  cacheCtx, write := ctx.CacheContext()

  // verification already done inside the antehandler
  ack := h(cacheCtx, msg.Packet)
  
  // write the cache only if succedded
  if ack.IsOK() {
    write()
  }
  
  res := ack.Err.Result()
  // set the result to OK to persist the state change
  res.Code = sdk.CodeOK
  
  // ackData will be stored as acknowledgement; []byte{} will be stored if not exists
  if ack.Data == nil {
    ack.Data = []byte{}
  }
  k.SetPacketAcknowledgement(ctx, msg.PortID, msg.ChannelID, msg.Sequence, ack.Data)

  return res
}
```

> Example application-side usage:

Reviewer: Thanks Joon, could you additionally write this handler with the specific implementation of ICS20 from `ibc-alpha`?

Reviewer: i.e `CustomPacket ` should be the ICS20 transfer packet logic

```go
func NewHandler(k Keeper) sdk.Handler {
  return func(ctx sdk.Context, msg sdk.Msg) sdk.Result {
    switch msg := msg.(type) {
    case ibc.MsgPacket:
      return k.port.WriteAcknowledgement(ctx, msg, func(ctx sdk.Context, p ibc.Packet) ibc.Ack {
        switch packet := packet.(type) {
        case CustomPacket: // i.e fulfills the Packet interface
          return handleCustomPacket(ctx, k, packet)
        }
      })
    case ibc.MsgAcknowledgement:
      switch ack := msg.Acknowledgement.(type) {
      case CustomAcknowledgement:
        return handleCustomAcknowledgement(ctx, k, msg.Acknowledgement)
      }
    case ibc.MsgTimeoutPacket:
      switch packet := msg.Packet.(type) {
      case CustomPacket:
        return handleCustomTimeoutPacket(ctx, k, msg.Packet)
      }
    }
  }
}

> func handleCustomPacket(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, packet MyPacket) ibc.Ack {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
func handleCustomPacket(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, packet MyPacket) sdk.Result {
```

callbacks, and verifies the acknowledgement commitment proof.

`handlePacketTimeout` and `handlePacketTimeoutOnClose` executes per-module
`onTimeoutPacket` callbacks, and verifies the timeout proof.

The mechanism is similar to the transaction handling logic in `baseapp`. After
authentication, the handler is executed, and the authentication state change
must be committed regardless of the result of the handler execution.

`handlePacketRecv` also requires acknowledgement writing which has to be done
after the handler execution and also must be commited regardless of the result of
the handler execution.

## Decision

The Cosmos SDK will define an `AnteDecorator` for IBC packet receiving. The
`AnteDecorator` will iterate over the messages included in the transaction, type
`switch` to check whether the message contains an incoming IBC packet, and if so
verify the Merkle proof.

```go
// Pseudocode
type ProofVerificationDecorator struct {
  clientKeeper ClientKeeper
  channelKeeper ChannelKeeper
}

func (pvr ProofVerificationDecorator) AnteHandle(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, simulate bool, next sdk.AnteHandler) (sdk.Context, error) {

>   var flag bool

Reviewer: what is `flag` for?

Author: To check whether the transaction includes an IBC message.

Reviewer 2: Why do we need this, exactly? (also see below comment)

Reviewer: can you make it more descriptive?

Reviewer: bump @mossid

Author: Will change to `ibcMsgFlag`

  for _, msg := range tx.GetMsgs() {
    var err error
    switch msg := msg.(type) {
    case client.MsgUpdateClient:
      err = pvr.clientKeeper.UpdateClient(msg.ClientID, msg.Header)
    case channel.MsgPacket:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyPacket(msg.Packet, msg.Proofs, msg.ProofHeight)
      flag = true
      // Store the empty acknowledgement for convinience
      pvr.channelKeeper.SetPacketAcknowledgement(ctx, msg.PortID, msg.ChannelID, msg.Sequence, []byte{})
    case chanel.MsgAcknowledgement:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyAcknowledgement(msg.Acknowledgement, msg.Proof, msg.ProofHeight)
      flag = true
    case channel.MsgTimeoutPacket:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyTimeout(msg.Packet, msg.Proof, msg.ProofHeight, msg.NextSequenceRecv)
      flag = true
    default:
      if flag {

>         return ctx, errors.New("Transaction cannot include both IBC packet messasges and normal messages")

Reviewer: why is this a problem?

Author: An attacker can include a failing message inside the transaction, which will abort the transaction so the packet messages that come after will be ignored but the sequence will be kept increased, which makes any actor able to skip arbitrary packets. Any transaction that includes IBC messages should not be aborted.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, if they do this we should revert the state changes from IBC packets (including sequence increases) as well - it should be possible to have both kinds of messages.

Reviewer: is there any potential room for improvement based on @cwgoes's comment?

Reviewer: ^^

Author: The `AnteHandler` state change(which includes sequence increasing) is committed regardless of the app handler result, so we cannot revert the state change after the process entered into the app handler.

Reviewer 2: Ah, hmm, that is a bit of an abstraction mismatch I suppose. 

Could we still allow regular messages & IBC packets as long as they aren't interleaved? (all regular messages first)

Reviewer 2: I still think we should try to find a way to do this. Maybe we can discuss?

Author: The optimal solution will be having an after-execution cleanup logic which will increase the sequence only after the packets were successfully executed(where the AnteHandler only verifies the proofs)

Reviewer 2: Should we do that, then?

Reviewer 5: Just to say that I proposed such an architecture for decorators. That they wrapped the handler, which would allow rolling back to a certain point if the handler failed.

This approach was rejected as needless complexity, but I think that decision could be revisited. Indeed, if you want to add after execution cleanup, please don't hack it in, but update the architecture to allow this to be cleanly.done.

Reviewer 2: In this case we want to increase the sequence regardless and instead write a "failure" acknowledgement if the packet processing throws (e.g. if the recipient account doesn't exist or something) - but we plan to use wrapper functions for writing acknowledgements in this fashion, essentially like you are proposing I think.

    k.SetPacketAcknowledgement(ctx, msg.PortID, msg.ChannelID, msg.Sequence, res.Data)
  }

  return res
}
```

Example application-side usage:

```go
func NewHandler(k Keeper) sdk.Handler {
  return func(ctx sdk.Context, msg sdk.Msg) sdk.Result {
    switch msg := msg.(type) {
    case ibc.MsgPacket:
      return k.port.WriteAcknowledgement(ctx, msg, func(ctx sdk.Context, p ibc.Packet) sdk.Result {
        switch packet := packet.(type) {
        case CustomPacket: // i.e fulfills the Packet interface
          return handleCustomPacket(ctx, k, packet)
        }
      })
    case ibc.MsgAcknowledgement:
      switch ack := msg.Acknowledgement.(type) {
      case CustomAcknowledgement:
        return handleCustomAcknowledgement(ctx, k, msg.Acknowledgement)
      }
    case ibc.MsgTimeoutPacket:
      switch packet := msg.Packet.(type) {
      case CustomPacket:
        return handleCustomTimeoutPacket(ctx, k, msg.Packet)
      }
    }
  }
}

func handleCustomPacket(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, packet MyPacket) sdk.Result {
  if failureCondition {
    return AckInvalidPacketContent(k.codespace, []byte{packet.Data})
  }
  // Handler logic
  return sdk.Result{}
}

> func handleCustomAcknowledgement(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, ack MyAcknowledgement) (res sdk.Result) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
func handleCustomAcknowledgement(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, ack MyAcknowledgement) sdk.Result {
```

  // Handler logic

>   return

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return sdk.Result{}
```

}

> func handleCustomTimeoutPacket(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, packet MyPacket) (res sdk.Result) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
func handleCustomTimeoutPacket(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, packet MyPacket) sdk.Result {
```

  // Handler logic

>   return

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return sdk.Result{}
```

# ADR 015: IBC Packet Receiver

## Changelog

- 2019 Oct 22: Initial Draft

## Context
 

> [ICS 26 - Routing Module](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module) defines function [`handlePacketRecv`](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module#packet-relay).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
[ICS 26 - Routing Module](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module) defines a function [`handlePacketRecv`](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module#packet-relay).
```

`handlePacketRecv` executes per-module `onRecvPacket` callbacks, verifies the
packet merkle proof, and pushes the acknowledgement bytes, if present, to the IBC

> channel `Keeper` state (ICS04).

Reviewer 6: I would link to ICS04 if possible.

`handlePacketAcknowledgement` executes per-module `onAcknowledgementPacket`
callbacks, and verifies the acknowledgement commitment proof.

`handlePacketTimeout` and `handlePacketTimeoutOnClose` executes per-module
`onTimeoutPacket` callbacks, and verifies the timeout proof.

The mechanism is similar to the transaction handling logic in `baseapp`. After
authentication, the handler is executed, and the authentication state change
must be committed regardless of the result of the handler execution.

`handlePacketRecv` also requires acknowledgement writing which has to be done
after the handler execution and also must be commited regardless of the result of
the handler execution.

> 

Reviewer 6: The context doesn't really define any problem...at least I can't see one immediately. I would state the problem clearly (purpose of the ADR) and how it relates to the ante-handler.

## Decision

The Cosmos SDK will define an `AnteDecorator` for IBC packet receiving. The
`AnteDecorator` will iterate over the messages included in the transaction, type
`switch` to check whether the message contains an incoming IBC packet, and if so
verify the Merkle proof.

```go

> // Pseudocode

Reviewer 6: These comments are unnecessary IMHO :)
```suggestion
```

type ProofVerificationDecorator struct {
  clientKeeper ClientKeeper
  channelKeeper ChannelKeeper
}

> func (pvr ProofVerificationDecorator) AnteHandle(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, simulate bool, next sdk.AnteHandler) (sdk.Context, error) {

Reviewer 6: nit: I've been avoiding package prefixes in ADRs (pseudo-code in general). e.g. `sdk.Context` => `Context`. It shortens the code and makes it easier to read.

  var flag bool

  var portID, channelID string

  for _, msg := range tx.GetMsgs() {
    var err error
    switch msg := msg.(type) {

>     case client.MsgUpdateClient:

Reviewer 6: nit: In the ADR this is OK, but I recommend in implementation that the `case` handlers be broken out into individual auxiliary methods/functions for improved readability and testing.

>     case client.MsgUpdateClient:

Reviewer 6: nit: All errors here should return typed errors. This will help devs. e.g. `return InvalidTxMultiPort`

      err = pvr.clientKeeper.UpdateClient(msg.ClientID, msg.Header)
    case channel.MsgPacket:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyPacket(msg.Packet, msg.Proofs, msg.ProofHeight)
      if flag {
        if msg.PortID != portID || msg.channelID != channelID {

>           return ctx, errors.New("Transaction cannot include IBC packets from different ports")

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
          return ctx, errors.New("transaction cannot include IBC packets from different ports")
```

        }
        portID = msg.PortID
        channelID = msg.ChannelID
      }
      flag = true

>       // Store the empty acknowledgement for convinience

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
      // store the empty acknowledgement for convenience
```

      pvr.channelKeeper.SetPacketAcknowledgement(ctx, msg.PortID, msg.ChannelID, msg.Sequence, []byte{})
    case chanel.MsgAcknowledgement:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyAcknowledgement(msg.Acknowledgement, msg.Proof, msg.ProofHeight)
      if flag {
        if msg.PortID != portID || msg.channelID != channelID {

>           return ctx, errors.New("Transaction cannot include IBC packets from different ports")

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
          return ctx, errors.New("transaction cannot include IBC packets from different ports")
```

        }
        portID = msg.PortID
        channelID = msg.ChannelID
      }
      flag = true
    case channel.MsgTimeoutPacket:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.VerifyTimeout(msg.Packet, msg.Proof, msg.ProofHeight, msg.NextSequenceRecv)
      if flag {
        if msg.PortID != portID || msg.channelID != channelID {

>           return ctx, errors.New("Transaction cannot include IBC packets from different ports")

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
          return ctx, errors.New("transaction cannot include IBC packets from different ports")
```

        }
        portID = msg.PortID
        channelID = msg.ChannelID
      }
      flag = true
    default:
      if flag {

>         return ctx, errors.New("Transaction cannot include both IBC packet messasges and normal messages")

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
        return ctx, errors.New("transaction cannot include both IBC packet messasges and normal messages")
```

>         return ctx, errors.New("Transaction cannot include both IBC packet messasges and normal messages")

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
        return ctx, errors.New("transaction cannot include both IBC packet messages and normal messages")
```

      }
      continue
    }

    if err != nil {
      return ctx, err
    }
  }
  return next(ctx, tx, simulate)
}
```

Where `MsgUpdateClient`, `MsgPacket`, `MsgAcknowledgement`, `MsgTimeoutPacket`
are `sdk.Msg` types correspond to `handleUpdateClient`, `handleRecvPacket`,
`handleAcknowledgementPacket`, `handleTimeoutPacket` of the routing module,
respectively.

An attacker can insert a failiing message before any of packet receiving message
preventing the packet messages to be processed but keeping the sequence increased.
If a transaction contains a packet receiving messages, any possibly failing 
messages should not be included in the transaction.

> The `ProofVerificationDecorator` will be inserted to the top level application.

Reviewer 4: I think there needs to be an explanation here for why the above logic is necessary to implement at the ante-handler level rather than just doing everything on the handler level.

# ADR 015: IBC Packet Receiver

## Changelog

- 2019 Oct 22: Initial Draft

## Context
 
[ICS 26 - Routing Module](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module) defines a function [`handlePacketRecv`](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module#packet-relay).

In ICS 26, the routing module is defined as a layer above each application module
which verifies and routes messages to the destination modules. It is possible to 
implement it as a separate module, however, we already have functionality to route
messages upon the destination identifiers in the baseapp. This ADR suggests 
to utilize existing `baseapp.router` tp route packets to application modules.

> Generally, each routing module callbacks have two separate steps in them, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, routing module callbacks have two separate steps in them, 
```

verificaton and execution. This corresponds to the `AnteHandler`-`Handler`
moodel inside the SDK. We can do the verificaton inside the `AnteHandler`
in order to increase developer ergonomics by reducing boilerplate 
verification code.

## Decision

> `PortKeeper` will have the capability key that is able to access only on the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`PortKeeper` will have the capability key that is able to access only the 
```

> channels binded to the port. Entities those holding a `PortKeeper` will be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
channels bound to the port. Entities that hold a `PortKeeper` will be
```

able to call the corresponding `ChannelKeeper`s method, but only with the
allowed port. `ChannelKeeper.Port(string, ChannelChecker)` will be defined to

> easily construct a capability-safe `PortKeeper`. This will be address in 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
easily construct a capability-safe `PortKeeper`. This will be addressed in 
```

another ADR and we will use unsecure `ChannelKeeper` for now.

`baseapp.runMsgs` will break the loop over the messages if one of the handlers
returns `!Result.IsOK()`. However, the outer logic will write the cached 
store if `Result.IsOK() || Result.Code.IsBreak()`. `Result.Code.IsBreak()` if

> `Result.Code == CodeTxBreak`.

Reviewer 4: Could you explain why we might want to write the cached logic sometimes even if one of the messages fails?

Reviewer 2: Because we want to persist sequence number increments & commitments even if IBC packet execution fails. It's basically analogous to nonces on accounts incrementing even if the tx fails in `DeliverTx`.

Reviewer: > Because we want to persist sequence number increments & commitments even if IBC packet execution fails. It's basically analogous to nonces on accounts incrementing even if the tx fails in DeliverTx.

this needs to be written down

`handleAcknowledgementPacket`, `handleTimeoutPacket` of the routing module,
respectively.

The side effects of `RecvPacket`, `VerifyAcknowledgement`, 
`VerifyTimeout` will be extracted out into separated functions, which will
be called by the application handlers after the execution.

```go
func (keeper ChannelKeeper) WriteAcknowledgement(ctx sdk.Context, packet Packet, ack []byte) {
  keeper.SetPacketAcknowledgement(ctx, packet.GetDestPort(), packet.GetDestChannel(), packet.GetSequence(), ack)
  keeper.SetNextSequenceRecv(ctx, packet.GetDestPort(), packet.GetDestChannel(), packet.GetSequence())
}

func (keeper ChannelKeeper) DeleteCommitment(ctx sdk.Context, packet Packet) {
  keeper.deletePacketCommitment(ctx, packet.GetSourcePort(), packet.GetSourceChannel(), packet.GetSequence())
}

func (keeper ChannelKeeper) DeleteCommitmentTimeout(ctx sdk.Context, packet Packet) {
  k.deletePacketCommitment(ctx, packet.GetSourcePort(), packet.GetSourceChannel(), packet.GetSequence())
  
  if channel.Ordering == types.ORDERED [
    channel.State = types.CLOSED
    k.SetChannel(ctx, packet.GetSourcePort(), packet.GetSourceChannel(), channel)
  }
}
```

> Each application handler should call respective finalization methods on the `PortKeeper`

Reviewer 4: Will the finalization methods have to be called by each module handler or do we want to handle it automatically?

Author: Finalization methods have to be called by each module handler.

Reviewer: >Finalization methods have to be called by each module handler.

please write that down in the ADR

> in order to increase sequence(in case of packet) or remove the commitment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in order to increase sequence (in case of packet) or remove the commitment
```

(in case of acknowledgement and timeout).
Calling those functions implies that the application logic has successfully executed. 
However, the handlers can return `Result` with `CodeTxBreak` after calling those methods
which will persist the state changes that has been already done but prevent any further 

> messages to be executed in case of semantically invalid packet. In any case the 

Reviewer 4: Why might this be useful in the IBC case?

Reviewer 2: See above response (but this should be added to the ADR).

application modules should never return state reverting result, which will make the 
channel unable to proceed.

`ChannelKeeper.CheckOpen` method will be introduced. `ChannelChecker` function will be 
provided by each of the `AppModule` and injected to `ChannelKeeper.Port()` at the 
top level application. `CheckOpen` will find the correct `ChennelChecker` using the 
`PortID` and call it, which will return an error if it is unacceptible by the application.

The `ProofVerificationDecorator` will be inserted to the top level application.

> It is not safe to make each application responsible to call proof verification 

Reviewer 4: Do you mean:
```suggestion
It is not safe to make each module responsible to call proof verification 
```
?

    ...
    NewIncrementSequenceDecorator(ak),
    ibcante.ProofVerificationDecorator(ibcKeeper.ClientKeeper, ibcKeeper.ChannelKeeper), // innermost AnteDecorator
  )
}
```

The implementation of this ADR will also change the `Data` field of the `Packet` type from `[]byte` (i.e. arbitrary data) to `PacketDataI`. This also removes the `Timeout` field from the `Packet` struct. This is because the `PacketDataI` interface now contains this information. You can see details about this in [ICS04](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-004-channel-and-packet-semantics#definitions). 

The `PacketDataI` is the application specific interface that provides information for the execuition of the application packet. In the case of ICS20 this would be `denom`, `amount` and `address`

```go
// PacketDataI defines the standard interface for IBC packet data
type PacketDataI interface {
	GetCommitment() []byte // Commitment form that will be stored in the state.
	GetTimeoutHeight() uint64

	ValidateBasic() sdk.Error
	Type() string
}
```

Example application-side usage:

```go
type AppModule struct {}

> func (module AppModule) CheckChannel(portID, channelID string, channel Channel) error {

Reviewer 2: Why is this a top-level function instead of a message handler?

Author: `CheckChannel` will be provided to `ChannelKeeper.Port()` at the top level application. Will add to the doc.

  err := k.SendTransfer(ctx,msg.PortID, msg.ChannelID, msg.Amount, msg.Sender, msg.Receiver)
  if err != nil {
    return sdk.ResultFromError(err)
  }

  return sdk.Result{}
}

func handlePacketDataTransfer(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, packet ibc.Packet, data PacketDataTransfer) sdk.Result {
  err := k.ReceiveTransfer(ctx, packet.GetSourcePort(), packet.GetSourceChannel(), packet.GetDestinationPort(), packet.GetDestinationChannel(), data)
  if err != nil {
    // TODO: Source chain sent invalid packet, shutdown channel
  }
  k.ChannelKeeper.WriteAcknowledgement([]byte{0x00}) // WriteAcknowledgement increases the sequence, preventing double spending
  return sdk.Result{}
}

func handleCustomTimeoutPacket(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, packet CustomPacket) sdk.Result {
  err := k.RecoverTransfer(ctx, packet.GetSourcePort(), packet.GetSourceChannel(), packet.GetDestinationPort(), packet.GetDestinationChannel(), data)
  if err != nil {
    // This chain sent invalid packet or cannot recover the funds
    panic(err)
  }
  k.ChannelKeeper.DeleteCommitmentTimeout(ctx, packet)
  // packet timeout should not fail
  return sdk.Result{}
}

> func handleMsgChannelOpen(ctx sdk.Context, k Keeper, msg ibc.MsgOpenChannel) sdk.Result {

Author: ```suggestion
func handleMsgChannelOpen(sdk.Context, k Keeper, msg MsgOpenChannel) Result {
```

  k.AllocateEscrowAddress(ctx, msg.ChannelID())
  return sdk.Result{}
}
```

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

- Intuitive interface for developers - IBC handlers do not need to care about IBC authentication
- State change commitment logic is embedded into `baseapp.runTx` logic

### Negative

- Cannot support dynamic ports, routing is tied to the baseapp router

>   Dynamic ports can be supported using hierarchical port identifier, see #5290 for detail

Reviewer 2: This isn't a negative.

# ADR 015: IBC Packet Receiver

## Changelog

- 2019 Oct 22: Initial Draft

## Context
 

> [ICS 26 - Routing Module](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module) defines a function [`handlePacketRecv`](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module#packet-relay).

Reviewer: this line doesn't have any context. Is it incomplete?

In ICS 26, the routing module is defined as a layer above each application module
which verifies and routes messages to the destination modules. It is possible to 
implement it as a separate module, however, we already have functionality to route
messages upon the destination identifiers in the baseapp. This ADR suggests 
to utilize existing `baseapp.router` to route packets to application modules.

Generally, routing module callbacks have two separate steps in them, 
verificaton and execution. This corresponds to the `AnteHandler`-`Handler`
model inside the SDK. We can do the verification inside the `AnteHandler`
in order to increase developer ergonomics by reducing boilerplate 
verification code.

## Decision

`PortKeeper` will have the capability key that is able to access only the 
channels bound to the port. Entities that hold a `PortKeeper` will be

> able to call the corresponding `ChannelKeeper`s method, but only with the

Reviewer: > call the corresponding `ChannelKeeper`s method

Which corresponding method?

allowed port. `ChannelKeeper.Port(string, ChannelChecker)` will be defined to
easily construct a capability-safe `PortKeeper`. This will be addressed in 
another ADR and we will use unsecure `ChannelKeeper` for now.

> `baseapp.runMsgs` will break the loop over the messages if one of the handlers

Reviewer: this paragraph has no context

returns `!Result.IsOK()`. However, the outer logic will write the cached 
store if `Result.IsOK() || Result.Code.IsBreak()`. `Result.Code.IsBreak()` if
`Result.Code == CodeTxBreak`.

```go
// Pseudocode

> func (app *BaseApp) runTx(tx sdk.Tx) (result sdk.Result) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
func (app *BaseApp) runTx(tx Tx) (result Result) {
```

  msgs := tx.GetMsgs()
  
  // AnteHandler
  if app.anteHandler != nil {
    anteCtx, msCache := app.cacheTxContext(ctx)
    newCtx, err := app.anteHandler(anteCtx, tx)
    if !newCtx.IsZero() {
      ctx = newCtx.WithMultiStore(ms)
    }
    
    if err != nil {
      // error handling logic
      return res
    }
    

>     msCache.Write()

Reviewer: where is this defined?

Author: It is defined at https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/baseapp/baseapp.go#L611

    case client.MsgUpdateClient:
      err = pvr.clientKeeper.UpdateClient(msg.ClientID, msg.Header)
    case channel.MsgPacket:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.RecvPacket(msg.Packet, msg.Proofs, msg.ProofHeight)
    case chanel.MsgAcknowledgement:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.AcknowledgementPacket(msg.Acknowledgement, msg.Proof, msg.ProofHeight)
    case channel.MsgTimeoutPacket:
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.TimeoutPacket(msg.Packet, msg.Proof, msg.ProofHeight, msg.NextSequenceRecv)
    case channel.MsgChannelOpenInit;
      err = pvr.channelKeeper.CheckOpen(msg.PortID, msg.ChannelID, msg.Channel)
    default:
      continue
    }

    if err != nil {
      return ctx, err
    }
  }
  
  return next(ctx, tx, simulate)
}
```

Where `MsgUpdateClient`, `MsgPacket`, `MsgAcknowledgement`, `MsgTimeoutPacket`
are `sdk.Msg` types correspond to `handleUpdateClient`, `handleRecvPacket`,
`handleAcknowledgementPacket`, `handleTimeoutPacket` of the routing module,
respectively.

The side effects of `RecvPacket`, `VerifyAcknowledgement`, 
`VerifyTimeout` will be extracted out into separated functions, which will
be called by the application handlers after the execution.

```go

> func (keeper ChannelKeeper) WriteAcknowledgement(ctx Context, packet Packet, ack []byte) {

Reviewer: can you provide more context for these function definitions?

}

func (keeper ChannelKeeper) DeleteCommitmentTimeout(ctx Context, packet Packet) {
  k.deletePacketCommitment(ctx, packet.GetSourcePort(), packet.GetSourceChannel(), packet.GetSequence())
  
  if channel.Ordering == types.ORDERED [
    channel.State = types.CLOSED
    k.SetChannel(ctx, packet.GetSourcePort(), packet.GetSourceChannel(), channel)
  }
}
```

Each application handler should call respective finalization methods on the `PortKeeper`
in order to increase sequence (in case of packet) or remove the commitment
(in case of acknowledgement and timeout).
Calling those functions implies that the application logic has successfully executed. 
However, the handlers can return `Result` with `CodeTxBreak` after calling those methods
which will persist the state changes that has been already done but prevent any further 
messages to be executed in case of semantically invalid packet. This will keep the sequence
increased in the previous IBC packets(thus preventing double execution) without 
proceeding to the following messages.
In any case the application modules should never return state reverting result, 
which will make the channel unable to proceed.

> `ChannelKeeper.CheckOpen` method will be introduced. `ChannelChecker` function will be 

Reviewer: > `ChannelKeeper.CheckOpen` method will be introduced.

why?

provided by each of the `AppModule` and injected to `ChannelKeeper.Port()` at the 
top level application. `CheckOpen` will find the correct `ChennelChecker` using the 
`PortID` and call it, which will return an error if it is unacceptible by the application.

The `ProofVerificationDecorator` will be inserted to the top level application.
It is not safe to make each module responsible to call proof verification 
logic, whereas application can misbehave(in terms of IBC protocol) by 
mistake.

The `ProofVerificationDecorator` should come right after the default sybil attack 
resistent layer from the current `auth.NewAnteHandler`:

```go
// add IBC ProofVerificationDecorator to the Chain of
func NewAnteHandler(
  ak keeper.AccountKeeper, supplyKeeper types.SupplyKeeper, ibcKeeper ibc.Keeper,
  sigGasConsumer SignatureVerificationGasConsumer) sdk.AnteHandler {
  return sdk.ChainAnteDecorators(
    NewSetUpContextDecorator(), // outermost AnteDecorator. SetUpContext must be called first
    ...
    NewIncrementSequenceDecorator(ak),
    ibcante.ProofVerificationDecorator(ibcKeeper.ClientKeeper, ibcKeeper.ChannelKeeper), // innermost AnteDecorator
  )
}
```

> The implementation of this ADR will also change the `Data` field of the `Packet` type from `[]byte` (i.e. arbitrary data) to `PacketDataI`. This also removes the `Timeout` field from the `Packet` struct. This is because the `PacketDataI` interface now contains this information. You can see details about this in [ICS04](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-004-channel-and-packet-semantics#definitions). 

Reviewer: why is this relevant to this ADR?

# ADR 015: IBC Packet Receiver

## Changelog

- 2019 Oct 22: Initial Draft

## Context

[ICS 26](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module) defines function [`handlePacketRecv`](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-026-routing-module#packet-relay). 
`handlePacketRecv` executes per-module `onRecvPacket` callbacks, verifies the packet merkle proof, and pushes the acknowledgement bytes, if present,
to the state. 

The mechanism is similar to the transaction handling logic in `baseapp`. After authentication, the handler is executed, and 
the authentication state change must be committed regardless of the result of the handler execution. 

> ICS 26 also requires acknowledgement writing which has to be done after the handler execution and also must be commited 

Reviewer: Do we also need to write the acknowledgment as part of this ADR?

Reviewer 2: If the acknowledgement is part of the return value of the handler it will need to be written by the code which calls the handler. This part is still unclear to me.

Author: We need a wrapper function inside the app handler, will add it

regardless of the result of the handler execution.

## Decision

> We will define an `AnteHandler` for IBC packet receiving. The `AnteHandler` will iterate over the messages included in the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Cosmos SDK will define an `AnteHandler` for IBC packet receiving. The `AnteHandler` will iterate over the messages included in the 
```

transaction, type switch to check whether the message contains an incoming IBC packet, and if so verify the Merkle proof.

```go
// Pseudocode
func IBCAnteHandler(ctx sdk.Context, tx sdk.Tx, bool) (sdk.Context, sdk.Result, bool) {
  for _, msg := range tx.GetMsgs() {
    if msg, ok := msg.(MsgPacket); ok {
      if err := VerifyPacket(msg.Packet, msg.Proofs, msg.ProofHeight); err != nil {
         return ctx, err.Result(), true
      }
    }
  }
  return ctx, sdk.Result{}, false
}
```

where `MsgPacket` is the `sdk.Msg` type including any IBC packet inside and embedding `Packet.Route()` method.

The `AnteHandler` will be inserted to the top level application, after the signature authentication logic provided by `auth.NewAnteHandler`, utilizing `AnteDecorator` pattern.

> This proposal does not cover automatic acknowledgement processing. Applications who want to return acknowledgement should manually handle multistore cacheing.

Reviewer 2: What do the applications call to write an acknowledgement?

The most natural pattern would be to return an acknowledgement - then some other code is responsible for writing it. If we aren't specifying that we should give an example of what the module code would look like to write an acknowledgement and how it would reference the IBC keeper and the packet in question (which has a sequence number).

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

> - Intuitive interface for developers - IBC handlers do not need to care about IBC authentication

Reviewer: > IBC handlers do not need to care about IBC authentication

message authentication I assume?

Author: Both message auth and packet auth, will add it to the doc

Reviewer 2: Thanks.

- State change commitment logic is embedded into `baseapp.runTx` logic
- IBC applications do not need to define message type for receiving packet

### Negative

> - AnteHandler processes over the whole transaction before the each handler, `UpdateClient` and `RecvPacket` cannot be processed in the same transaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- AnteHandler processes over all the transactions before each handler is executed. `UpdateClient` and `RecvPacket` cannot be processed in the same transaction
```

> - Cannot support dynamic ports, routing is tied to the baseapp router

Reviewer 2: This is a serious problem. We will want dynamic port support, at least in the sense that ports can be bound at runtime - say for CosmWASM contracts which bind ports.

I also don't entirely understand why dynamic ports would be impossible with this design. We might need to write a different router, that's true.

Author: The messages embed the packets which have the method `Route()`. After `IBCAnteHandler` verifies the proof, the packet is then routed to the respective handlers using `baseapp.Router`, which is fixed at the initialization time. 

The problem with the dynamic port support on the sdk is that it is not secured by consensus because it is stored in memory. If we have a `rootmultistore` like structure for port allocation, it will still add and remove `pointer => portid` inside the memory. 

Afaik the intention was to keep every mutable state inside the tree instead of memory to make it falsifiable via apphash in the consensus, and having any mutability inside keeper related struct was considered antipattern. 

I am looking into this problem and trying to find a solution from swingset, but I am not sure if there is any safe way we can use golang pointers as capability key while keeping it consensus safe.

Author: One of the solutions comes into my mind is hierarchical ports: port is not defined by a single string but a list of strings(like keypath for nested multistore). Except for the last port id all the former ones can be static and not be modified in runtime(like rootmultistore). The last one should be able to modified in runtime(like iavlstore). The list of portids as a whole will be therefore runtime modifiable.

The last one will not use golang pointer as capability key but will define their own. In the example of ethermint module, the module has total control over the contracts, so it can track the capability of each contract without relying on golang pointer.

Reviewer 2: I think we will need a 'dynamic capability' module or store in the SDK to provide dynamic capability keys, yes. This probably merits a separate ADR.

However, I still think the underlying implementation can be Golang pointers - we just need to recreate unique pointers for all capabilities whenever the blockchain is 'restarted' (e.g. `gaiad start` after stopping it, syncing from genesis, etc).

Reviewer 2: Split into https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/5290.

Reviewer: ^^

Please write the summary of the comments and the reference to the new issue.

Reviewer: ^^
